{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f36\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f37\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f39\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f40\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f41\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f42\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f43\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f44\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 footer;}{\*\cs16 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext17 header;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid12588860}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.2627;}{\info{\title Glossary of Spanish and Indian Terms}{\author Dr. Ruben G. Mendoza}
{\operator Ruben Mendoza}{\creatim\yr2003\mo9\dy26\hr6\min11}{\revtim\yr2003\mo9\dy26\hr6\min11}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords673}{\nofchars3840}{\*\company -}{\nofcharsws4504}{\vern16437}}
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\lytprtmet\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace120\dgvspace120\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow3
\jcompress\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot12588860 \fet0\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\i\insrsid12588860 Old Mission San Juan\tab \tab Ruben G. Mendoza (Draft of 8/14/98)
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {\cs16\insrsid12588860 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {
\cs16\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid12588860 1}}}{\cs16\insrsid12588860 
\par }\pard \s15\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid12588860 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid12588860 Glossary of Spanish and Indian Terms}{\fs24\insrsid12588860 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid12588860 
\par Adobe: sun-dried brick
\par Acsun: thirst (Mutsun)
\par Alabado: a hymn of praise
\par Ammani: rain (Mutsun)
\par Ansa: mother (Mutsun)
\par Apsa: father (Mutsun)
\par Apse: area of main altar
\par Apapahs: nephew 
\par Argue: oak tree
\par Asuncion: feast of the Assumption
\par Atole: corn meal mush
\par Bodega: storeroom
\par Bulto: a sculpted religious figure
\par Caballu: horse (Mutsun)
\par Campo Santo: Holy Ground or cemetary
\par Carpinteria: carpenter shop
\par Chitesmac: dancers (Mutsun)
\par Chitte: dance (Mutsun)
\par Convento: living and working quarters of regular clergy
\par Corral de Piedra: rock fence or corral
\par Cothregues: snake (Mutsun)
\par Crucero: cross bearer
\par Dado: painted or tiled design on lower portion of interior walls
\par Dios: God
\par Doctrina: instruction
\par Dolores: sorrows
\par Don: Spanish title for gentleman
\par Dona: a married lady
\par El Camino Real: The King\rquote s Road
\par El Camino Viejo: The Old Road of the Central Valley
\par El Molino: mill
\par Fiesta: feast
\par Fray: Friar or Franciscan brother
\par Friar: member of a religious order (e.g., a Franciscan brother)
\par Frijoles: beans
\par Garth: open courtyard or patio of a cloister
\par Gente de razon: \'93people of reason\'94 or Christians
\par Gin: eyes (Mutsun)
\par Gireni: pinon (Mutsun)
\par Gittiani: tuna or cactus fruit (Mutsun)
\par Geigeie, ijime pire: temblor or earthquake (Mutsun)
\par Guarchigmin innu: narrow road or path (Mutsun)
\par Guare: red feather frontal ornament (Mutsun)
\par Guatsu: nine (Mutsun)
\par Gueren: rabbit (Mutsun)
\par Hemethscha: one (Mutsun)
\par Horno: oven
\par Hornitos: little ovens
\par Humirina: baptism
\par Indios Sanjuaneros: San Juan Indians
\par Inis: son (Mutsun)
\par Jai: mouth (Mutsun)
\par Jesu Christusse: Jesus Christ (Mutsun)
\par Junipero: juniper
\par Lagi: twirling game (Mutsun)
\par Madre: mother
\par Maitsun: laughter (Mutsun)
\par Mano: hand, small grinding stone
\par Matsu: ten (Mutsun)
\par Mayordomo: superintendent
\par Menen: grandmother (Mutsun)
\par Metate: stone grinding platform
\par Mezcla: durable plaster used for floors and walls
\par Milpitas: small truck garden
\par Mitthremac: elders or ancestors (Mutsun)
\par Monterey: King\rquote s mountain
\par Mucurma: woman (Mutsun)
\par Mun: earth (Mutsun)
\par Nacimiento: birth or origin
\par Naquichi: six (Mutsun)
\par Nave: central aisle of church that holds congregation
\par Nicho: recessed area in wall for holding religious images
\par Nopal: prickly pear cactus
\par Noson: soul (Mutsun)
\par Nuestro: our
\par Nuevo: new
\par Ores: bear (Mutsun)
\par Padre: father
\par Palsin: groundstone mortar or metate (Mutsun)
\par Paraiso: paradise
\par Paratu: carpenter (Mutsun)
\par Pare: braid (Mutsun)
\par Parnes: five (Mutsun)
\par Patio: open court
\par Pinole: corn meal
\par Plaza: public square
\par Portal: entrance to a building
\par Porteria: one of two entrances to convento
\par Posol: pozole stew (Mutsun)
\par Potrero: pasture
\par Pozo: well
\par Pozole: stew with vegetables, meat and grain
\par Presidio: military garrison
\par Pueblo: town or village
\par Pujthra: bread (Mutsun)
\par Pulga: flea
\par Pusninis: whirlwind (Mutsun)
\par Rajopa: sunlight (Mutsun)
\par Rancheria: hamlet or cluster of huts
\par Rebozo: muffler, shawl
\par Refectory: dining hall of convento
\par Retablo: altar screen, retable, reredo, or altarpiece
\par Rigui: transform (Mutsun)
\par Rithrai: rabbit skin dress (Mutsun)
\par Roble: oak
\par Rodeo: cattle round-up
\par Roromis: toy (Mutsun)
\par Rostrum: lower portion of vestibule platform or raised lecturn
\par Ruca: house (Mutsun)
\par Sacramento: Sacrament
\par Sacristy: room directly adjacent sanctuary for vestments
\par Sala de profundis: room in convento reserved for meditation
\par Salinas: salt pits
\par Sanctuary: sacred area containing main altar
\par Santo: religious imagery; literally \'93saint,\'94 \'93saintly,\'94 or \'93holy\'94
\par San Andres: St. Andrew
\par San Bernardino: St. Bernardine
\par San Buenaventura: St. Bonaventure
\par San Diego: St. Didacus
\par San Francisco: St. Francis
\par San Jose: St. Joseph
\par San Juan Bautista: St. John the Baptist
\par San Mateo: St. Matthew
\par San Miguel: St. Michael
\par San Pablo: St. Paul
\par San Pascual: St. Paschal
\par San Pedro: St. Peter
\par San Rafael: St. Raphael
\par Santa Ana: St. Anne
\par Santa Barbara: St. Barbara
\par Santa Catalina: St. Catherine
\par Santa Clara: St. Clare
\par Santa Cruz: Holy Cross
\par Santa Ines: St. Agnes
\par Santa Isabel: St. Elizabeth
\par Santa Maria: Holy Mary
\par Santo Bulto: principal santo of main altar
\par Soledad: solitude
\par Sotocoro: vestibule area under choir loft
\par Tabernacle: cupboard-like case attached to altar reserved for consecrated host
\par Temescal: sweat bath
\par Tester: cupola or flat roof over elevated vestibule or lecturn
\par Tortilla: thin cornmeal cake
\par Thraquichi: seven (Mutsun)
\par Transept: areas within church reserved for side-altars
\par Trigo: wheat or wheat field
\par Uiji: fish (Mutsun)
\par Usthrgin: two (Mutsun)
\par Uthrit: four (Mutsun)
\par Vaquero: cowboy
\par Vara: Spanish unit of measure equal to 33.07 inches
\par Zaguan: entrance hall
\par Zanja: ditch or trench
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid12588860 
\par }}